{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Book Antiqua;}{\f1\froman\fcharset0 GPJCOE+Garamond;}{\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 GPJDFD+Arial;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f4\froman\fcharset0 GPJDJE+Garamond;}{\f5\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f6\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 CG Times;}{\f7\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f8\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Cambria;}{\f9\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f10\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{ Normal;}{\s1 heading 1;}{\s2 heading 2;}{\s3 heading 3;}{\s4 heading 4;}{\s5 heading 5;}{\s6 heading 6;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.16299}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\widctlpar\qc\cf1\f0\fs72\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\f1\fs24\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\qc\cf1\f0\fs72 Strategic Downsizing Proposal Q2 - 2018\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\f1\fs24\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\qc\cf1\b\f0\fs52 Prepared By:\par
Dennis Kaplan\par
Jessica White, PhD\par
GHC Strategic Consulting \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\b0\fs24\par
\par
\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\s6\qc\cf1\fs28\par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\f1\fs24\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
 \par

\pard\widctlpar\qr\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\f0\fs20 Updated:  February 27, 2018\f1\fs24\par

\pard\widctlpar\f0\fs48 Introduction \par

\pard\widctlpar\s5\li420\sb240\sa60\cf1\b\i\fs26\par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\b0\i0\fs24\par
\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\tx720\fs52 T\fs24 elling an employee that his or her job is being eliminated is, perhaps, one of the most difficult challenges a manager or supervisor may encounter. It is doubly hard for the affected employee to understand this action when they have no control over the decision. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf1\f2\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\tx720\cf0\f0 This guide has been created to assist managers and supervisors in working through the layoff process with dignity and respect for both the employee who is leaving, and for the employees remaining in the department. We have researched best practices from a variety of organizations and other sources and have compiled the following information that we hope you will find helpful in managing these changes in your department. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf1\f2\par
\f0\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\tx720\cf0\tab\fs114\par

\pard\widctlpar\b\fs32 Layoff and/or Restructure Process Steps\par
\b0\fs22\par
There are a number of considerations that must be met on any layoff/ restructure process.\~ The following are the essential steps: \par
\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720 Create a layoff justification document that outlines the \lquote talking points\rquote  regarding the rationale behind this decision (see page 5).\~ This document is used in a number of ways \endash  HRS will use it to provide the appropriate union with the essential information, information will also be incorporated in the talking points in letters to the employee(s), it will inform content for other communications with staff within the department and any other stakeholder(s) you will want to inform. \~\par

\pard\widctlpar\li720  \par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720 Complete the Incumbent Seniority List worksheet. HRS will need to review the worksheet to ensure that all Collective Bargaining Agreement provisions are met.\~ This list needs to be reviewed prior to communicating to employee(s).  \~ You can send this document along with your talking points to HRS for review.\~ \par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720 Meet with an HRS consultant \endash  to talk through any questions, concerns, resources, issues etc., prior to implementing the communications.\~ This may help you to frame your approach and put together needed resources for the impacted staff.\~ \par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720 Assess communication and change management issues that will impact your team.\~ The Stakeholder Analysis Worksheet and/or the Communication Plan at a Glance worksheet will help you think through who will be impacted by this layoff and help formulate your transition and communications plans.\~ These tools can be completed to the degree that you desire as it may help to identify issues that may have been overlooked.\~ For example,\~the work that is completed by this position to be laid-off will need to be transitioned. These tools will help plan what staff may want to know about that fact, training concerns, etc.\par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720 Notify the employee(s) who has been targeted for layoff in a 1:1 meeting with a copy of the notification letter. Please note that you must provide a minimum of 30 days for most of our Collective Bargaining Agreements. \~The Best Practices document has several suggestions and a script on how to make this critical meeting effective.\~ Please read this section.\~ \b Very Important.\b0\~ \par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720 Meet with the entire staff to provide the rationale and answer any questions.\~ This needs to be done as quickly as possible after your meeting with the impacted staff member(s).\~ Finally, it is important that you continually follow up with staff during and after the layoff period to make sure that any residual issues are addressed quickly.\~ It is not uncommon for layoffs to trigger fears that in turn engender behaviors that may not be helpful to the team.\par

\pard\widctlpar\f1\fs24\page\f0\fs48 Communication \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\par

\pard\widctlpar\fs52 C\fs24 ommunication is key to a successful layoff process. If your department is facing the need to restructure your department\rquote s workforce, here are some important points to remember: \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\ul\par
\b Prior to the layoff notification(s) \ulnone\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\qj\ul\b0 Plan your communication early\ulnone  - Plan what you will tell your employees about possible layoffs.  Developing a formal communications document with a list of talking points will be helpful.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\ul Communicate early and often\ulnone . Plan when you will tell your employees about possible layoffs. Keep them apprised of developments over time. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\ul Communicate openly and honestly\ulnone . Employees can better plan for a worst-case scenario if they know the possibilities. \par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\ul\b During the layoff notification process \ulnone\par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\qj\tab\b0  See \ldblquote Preparing for and Conducting the Layoff Notification Meeting\rdblquote  (beginning on page 5) \par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\ul\b After the layoff notification(s) \ulnone\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\qj\ul\b0 Continue communication with separating employee(s\ulnone ). See \ldblquote Preparing for and Conducting the Layoff Notification Meeting\rdblquote  (beginning on page 5). \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\ul Communicate with the remaining staff. \ulnone Remaining employees may feel that they will be next to lose their jobs and some may feel guilty when colleagues have lost their jobs. \par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1800\qj Be honest about what you know and what you can share. This not only minimizes concern relating to employees\rquote  own job security but also diminishes the rumor mill. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Facilitate group closure by giving employees a chance to express their concerns publicly and hear directly from you about what has occurred. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Listen to how they feel and prepare to reassure them. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Inform them of changes in workload or assignments and discuss with them how the work will be covered. \par

\pard\widctlpar\par
\par
\fs48 Creating Your Talking Points \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\cf1\fs52 A\fs24  \i Talking Points\i0  document is a very helpful tool in developing communications for the various audiences that will be impacted by a layoff. This document is a concise distillation of the reasons why the layoff is needed.  It is important to use the \i Talking Points \i0 as a basis of all communications that will occur during the layoff process.\i   \i0 This assures that everyone has the same information, and that communications are consistent\cf0 .  Key components of the \i Talking Points\i0  document include: \par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720 The rationale for the layoff including a history of why the layoff is necessary.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}The vision and mission of the organization.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Efforts made to minimize the impact of job loss.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}The value of how this change will positively impact the university (see core values below.) \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Who will be impacted \endash  those targeted for layoff, coworkers, campus community and/or students, etc.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}The changes that are anticipated (to the degree that they are known at this point) \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}What will not change (to the degree that this is known at the time of the announcement) \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}The timing for changes (as much as this is known) \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Resources that will be implemented to support those who are experiencing a job loss.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Who to contact for more information (name, title, phone number, email address) \par

\pard\widctlpar\par
Once the above communication document is created, it is important to filter the content through The University\rquote s core values and ask yourself if it reflects a commitment to the following:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\fs20 Learning experiences of high quality designed to allow students to realize their full potential; \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Basic and applied research that contributes to knowledge and meets the needs of the State, region, nation, and world; \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Diversity and community among students, faculty, and staff; \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Affordable access to higher education for Montanans; \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Effective and efficient use of resources, providing full accountability for all funds; and \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Service to the citizens, communities, regions, business, industry, State, and world.\~\par

\pard\widctlpar\fs24\par
When ever possible, incorporate the above core values into the Talking Points communication plan.\par
\fs48\par
Preparing for and Conducting a Layoff Notification Meeting \par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj I\fs24 nforming employee they are losing their job is a difficult and stressful task for a manager or supervisor. For the interaction between the employee and the manager or supervisor to go smoothly as possible, careful preparation and planning are the most important elements. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf1\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\cf0 The objectives of the notification meeting are twofold:\par

\pard\widctlpar\fi720\qj  (1) To inform the employee that his/her job has been eliminated and that he or she is being separated, \b and\b0\par
(2) To do so in a respectful and dignified manner that keeps the person feeling positive about the University and begins the transition process in a positive way. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf1\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\ul\b Pre-Meeting Preparation \ulnone\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\qj\b0 Be familiar with the circumstances (e.g. budget cuts, department reorganization) leading to the elimination of the employee\rquote s position. Also, be familiar with the process that was followed, including how the decision was made in selecting who would be laid off. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Prepare a script as a guide. This will ensure that you convey all the necessary information to the employee. Practice and rehearse the message you will deliver and how you will deliver it without reading your script word for word. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Consider if the employee will leave immediately after being notified of the layoff or will continue to work through the period of notice. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Consider how you will handle the employee\rquote s workload and what you will tell the employee if you are asked. Will it be distributed among other employees? Will services be eliminated? \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Prepare some recommended actions for the employee to pursue. Provide names and telephone numbers.  In addition, refer to the following as resources that are available for them:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1800\qj Employee Assistance Program  for counseling \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}HRS Benefits Representative to learn about available benefits \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Recruitment Representative to learn about preferential rehire and re-employment opportunities \par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Be aware that the separation process can be emotional for all parties; prepare for this. Because of the emotional context it is important to anticipate questions you could be asked and have the answers to those questions available. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\qj\cf1 Take the time necessary to make the proper arrangements for the notification meeting. \par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1800\qj Select a place where you can have privacy. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Select a time earlier in the day on a day that is not immediately prior to a weekend, holiday, or scheduled vacation for either the employee or manager/supervisor.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Consider the day in relationship to significant dates for the employee (e.g. family celebration, religious holiday, employee\rquote s birthday, etc.) \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Plan for uninterrupted time. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Allow enough time to complete the meeting without being rushed including time for the employee to ask questions. \par

\pard\widctlpar\li360\qj\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Consider having an appropriate person (i.e. a department administrative assistant) who is not privy to the subject of the meeting notify the employee of the meeting. This will allow you to introduce the purpose of the meeting in a private, controlled manner without engaging with the employee before you are prepared to speak to them. \par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\qj\tab\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Depending on your knowledge of the employee it may be advisable to have an EAP Counselor or a Human Resources Director be on-call or attend the meeting if needed. Discuss with them any possible problems you feel could occur or any concerns you may have.  In addition, you may also wish to consult with the UM\rquote s Public Safety department if you feel there is a possibility of a violent reaction. \par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\qj\tab\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Arrange for another manager to be with you during the meeting. \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Assess the impact of the employee\rquote s departure on co-workers and clients. \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Seek appropriate coaching from Human Resources Consultants and/or Faculty Staff Assistance Program Counselors. \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\ul\par
\par
\b The Notification Meeting \par
\ulnone\par
\b0 Employee notifications should be conducted in person. Typically, the employee\rquote s immediate supervisor or the department manager conducts the notification meeting. This would \ul\b not\ulnone\b0  be a good time to have someone with whom the employee has never spoken conduct the meeting. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\cf1\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Don\rquote t engage in small talk, get to the point. Deliver the message directly but compassionately and allow the employee time to read the written notice of layoff you will give them during this meeting. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj\cf1 Stay with your script and remain calm. Straightforward, clear explanations are important. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj\cf1 Give the employee some background explaining why this decision is necessary. \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Do not make comments, even if well intended, that could compromise the decision. Stay away from discussions that could confuse the primary message. \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Be sensitive to the employee\rquote s situation, but also be direct and firm. Make sure that the employee knows the decision is final and is non-negotiable. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj\cf1 Don\rquote t blame others for the actions being taken. \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Don\rquote t become defensive, argumentative or confrontational. It is best not to critique the decision that has been made. \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Be sensitive to the employee\rquote s response. Hearing the employee does not mean you agree with him/her. \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Tell the employee how much you appreciate the work they have done and recognize his/her contributions. \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj\cf0\f3\lang1024\'b7\tab\cf1\b\f0\lang1033 Offer support and encouragement; treat the employee in a dignified manner. \par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\qj\b0 Encourage the employee to contact the resources available (e.g. Employee Assistance Program, Benefits, Employment, etc.). \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Be available in the next few days to meet with the employee if he or she has additional questions. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Understand and appreciate the employee\rquote s position. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Focus the employee on the next steps in his/her future. \par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li360\qj Listen carefully and, after the meeting, document anything that could lead to a potential problem. Consult with Human Resources and/or Faculty Staff Assistance Program, if appropriate. \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\cf1\ul\b\page Problems that May Occur in the Meeting \par
\ulnone\b0\par
The employee may: \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\qj Become resistant, defensive and/or threatening want to plead his/her case, or bargain for another opportunity.\cf1\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\cf0 Want to speak with a \ldblquote decision-maker\rdblquote .\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Ask \ldblquote why me?\rdblquote  questions.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Threaten a lawsuit or other formal action such as a retaliation complaint\cf1\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\cf0 May get personally upset with the manager or supervisor\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Try to make the issue personal or about performance \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Argue about a person being retained who they believe is less capable, has less seniority, etc.\cf1\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\cf0 List the repercussions cascading from the job loss.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Break down emotionally. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Go into shock and not accept what is happening.\par

\pard\widctlpar\li720\cf1\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\ul\b How to Deal with Emotional Reactions\par
\ulnone\b0 Stay in control of the meeting and your emotions at all times. Be familiar with, and comment on, how the decision was made.  Be supportive and offer positive suggestions where appropriate.  \par

\pard\widctlpar\li360\cf0\par
Be prepared for the following reactions:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1080 If crying occurs:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1440 Offer tissues\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Permit the employee the time to be alone to cry, if needed.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Be supportive, but refrain from touching the employee.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Be patient.\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1080 If anger occurs:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1440 Listen.  Anger is a normal response.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Respond to verbal attacks assertively.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Remain calm.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Do not discuss employee performance issues.\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1080 If silence occurs:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1440\tx1800\tx1980 Acknowledge the employee\rquote s feelings.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Allow the employee to discuss feelings.  Be empathetic.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Ask open-ended questions to determine that the employee understands the layoff message.\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1080\tx1800 If denial occurs:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1440\tx1800 Repeat or rephrase statements.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Ask open-ended questions to determine whether the employee understands the layoff message.\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1080\tx1800 If threats occur:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1440\tx1800 Ask the employee if he or she understands the seriousness of his or her words.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Suggest a brief cool down period, and then reconvene.\par

\pard\widctlpar\cf1\b\par
\b0\par
\par
\ul\b Things to Do After the Meeting\par
\ulnone\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720\b0 Conduct a follow-up meeting with the employee to see how he/she is coping and provide any information you were not able to provide in the notification meeting. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}If the employee is working until his/her separation date, you should supervise this employee just as you would any other employee. \par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Be aware of the employee\rquote s emotional state. If you have concerns, notify your resources.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Observe what\rquote s going on in the office between the separating employee and the remaining employees. (e.g., are the remaining employees being respectful and supportive or systematically excluding this person? How is the telephone being answered when this person is not around?).\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Notify Human Resources of any critical issues. \par

\pard\widctlpar\par
\par
\par
\cf0\fs48 Follow-up with Remaining Employees\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\cf1\fs24\par
With discretion, inform the remaining employees about the action(s) that have taken place. Understand that people have lost friends and may have their own anxieties. Get people refocused quickly on any restructuring, reassignment of work or other changes.\par
\par
Discuss workload and/or support concerns and needs. Focus on the positives.\par
\par
Thank employees for their continued support but make no promises or guarantees about the future.\par
\par
Be accessible to your employees for any issues or concerns they may have about the changes.\par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\par
Above all, be tactful, direct and clear in explaining the circumstances that led up to the decision, the decision-making process, and the changes within the organization.  Offer employees the opportunity to ask questions.\par
\f1\page\f0\fs48 Sample Dialogue with the Employee \par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\cf1\fs44\par
T\fs24 he following information may assist in planning a script for the layoff notification meeting as well as preparing the manager or supervisor for various reactions from the employee. \par

\pard\widctlpar\par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-1080\li1080 [Manager to employee] \par

\pard\widctlpar\tab\ul 1. Greet the employee. \ulnone\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\f4 Manager: Hello, _______. Thank you for meeting with me. \par

\pard\widctlpar\f0\par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-720\li1080\qj\par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-1080\li1080\qj\f4 Manager: I\rquote ve called this meeting because I must, unfortunately, inform you that your position has been eliminated. We do not have another position to offer you. This means you are being laid off. Here is your official Notice of Layoff. \par
. \par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-720\li1080\qj\f0 2. \ul Notification \ulnone (speak slowly and calmly) \par

\pard\widctlpar\li1080\ri1440\qj\par
(Give letter to employee and pause to allow the employee time to read the notice and process the information).\par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-1080\li1080\qj\f4 Manager: As you may know, we are in a time of (budget cutbacks, reorganization, etc.) Although, we\rquote ve done everything possible to minimize the impact of these __________ on our department, we still need to implement some very difficult decisions.  I\rquote d like you to know that this action is not easily taken and only after long and careful review of many options. It is a final decision. \par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-720\li1080\qj\f0\par

\pard\widctlpar\qc\b (Pause for a few seconds) \par
\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\qj\b0 Manager: I know this is difficult news. Is everything I\rquote ve said clear to you? Do you have any questions? \par

\pard\widctlpar\cf0\f2\par
\f0\par
\par
The employee will, typically, lead the conversation at this point. Answer questions honestly and appropriately. You should expect reactions anywhere in the range of emotional behavior to logical, strictly business related behavior.\par
\par
\par
\par
\ul\b Appropriate Response to Emotional Reactions \par
\ulnone\b0\par
In addition to physical reactions such as crying, anger and non-acceptance, emotional   responses may also include the \ldblquote why\rdblquote  questions. \ldblquote Why me?\rdblquote  \ldblquote Why not another employee?\rdblquote  \ldblquote Why did you make this decision?\rdblquote  Other questions may include:\par
\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720 Who made this decision?\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Who can I talk with to get this decision reversed?\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Are there any other jobs available for me?\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Can I keep my job if I take a pay cut or reduce my time?\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Who else is being released?\par

\pard\widctlpar\par
Listen carefully and make eye contact with the employee. Assess the employee\rquote s emotional state and/or behavior to see if he/she might be a threat to himself/herself or others. If so, call your resources for assistance. Otherwise, answer those questions that are appropriate to answer. Do not allow the employee to continue too long.\par
\par
Show empathy for the employee but avoid trite statements or platitudes such as: \par
\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft1939\trrh310\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\cellx6503 
\pard\intbl\widctlpar\ldblquote It\rquote s not the end of the world.\rdblquote  \cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft1939\trrh310\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\cellx6503 
\pard\intbl\widctlpar\ldblquote Consider this a blessing in disguise.\rdblquote  \cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft1939\trrh310\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\cellx6503 
\pard\intbl\widctlpar\ldblquote The glass isn\rquote t half empty, it\rquote s half full.\rdblquote  \cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft1939\trrh310\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\cellx6503 
\pard\intbl\widctlpar\ldblquote It\rquote s just a job.\rdblquote  \cell\row 
\pard\widctlpar\par
Manager: \tab Is there someone I can call for you? \par
\f1\par
\f0 While you may wish to continue with the meeting, consider what might be best for the employee and whether he/she will hear any further information you may deliver at this time. In most cases, you should take the time to deal with the emotional reactions and responses of the employee before turning to any \ldblquote housekeeping\rdblquote  matters you need to deal with. \par
\b Or \b0\tab\tab Would you like to take a brief break before we continue? \par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\fi-1440\li1440\b Or\b0  \tab Would you like to leave for the rest of the day and we can continue this discussion tomorrow?\par

\pard\widctlpar\par
In many instances, the employee may move directly to the facts relating to the layoff. This allows the manager to begin discussion of the \ldblquote housekeeping\rdblquote  matters. \par
\par
\b Housekeeping Matters \par
\b0 Manager: At this point, I need to discuss with you how you will leave the department and the resources and assistance the University makes available to you. \par
\par
\par
This transition statement will reinforce that the action being taken is final and will begin moving the employee forward in that direction. Again, make eye contact with the employee and speak calmly. \par
\par
\par
\par
Given the staff person will be working after the notification meeting, it will be important to discuss the following:\par
\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li1080 Confirm last date of work.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Encourage the staff member to make an appointment with Human Resource Services to review transition resources such as:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent360{\pntxtb\'B7}}\hyphpar0\widctlpar\fi-360\li1800\f6 Hiring Preference Procedures.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Resume Service/Effective Interviewing\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Time Off To Attend Interviews\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Health Benefits\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}How to Apply for Unemployment Benefits\par

\pard\widctlpar\f0\par
In addition, whenever possible, make efforts to complete recognition events, going away parties, etc.  Obtain permission from the affected staff members before scheduling an event.   \par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\fs48\par
\par
\page Collective Bargaining Requirements\par
\ul\b\fs24\par
CARPENTERS:\par
\ulnone\b0\par
\b Notice:\b0   The Bargaining Agent shall be given at least ten (10) working days\rquote  notice of any anticipated layoff other than a scheduled layoff of any employee in the bargaining unit.  Layoffs shall be made in reverse order of seniority within a classification.  Seniority means a permanent employee\rquote s length of uninterrupted service with the employing campus in the bargaining unit.  \par
\par
\b Recall:  \b0 Recalls to employment shall be in the order of seniority within a classification. Recalls to employment shall be in order of seniority within a classification as long as the retained employees have the required skills and related qualifications. Both the employee and the Bargaining Agent shall be notified by certified mail of any recall to employment and if the employee fails to communicate acceptance of the offer of reemployment within ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of the offer, the employee shall be considered as having forfeited the right to reemployment. Employees shall be eligible for recall for up to one (1) year from the date of a temporary layoff.  \par
\b\par

\pard\keepn\widctlpar\s3\sb240\sa60\ul ELECTRICIANS\par

\pard\widctlpar\ulnone\b0\par
\b Notice:\b0   The bargaining agent shall be given at least ten (10) working days\rquote  notice of any anticipated layoff other than a scheduled layoff of any employee in the bargaining unit. Both layoffs and recalls to employment shall be in order of seniority within a classification.  The employee last hired will be the first released within a classification and the employee last released will be the first rehired within a classification.  \par
\par
\b Recall: \b0  Employees will be eligible for recall for up to one (1) year from the date of layoff.  Both the employee and the bargaining agent shall be notified by certified mail of any recall to employment and if the employee fails to communicate acceptance of the offer of reemployment within ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of offer, the employee shall be considered as having forfeited the right to reemployment.  \par
\par
\ul\b LABORERS\b0  \par
\ulnone\par
\b Notice:\b0   Employees who are scheduled to be released shall be given at least ten (10) working days\rquote  notice. Layoffs caused by reduction in force shall be in order of seniority within a classification.\par
The employee last hired within a classification shall be the first released.  \par
\par
\b Recall:  \b0 All recalls to employment shall be likewise in order of seniority within a classification if the employee can perform the duties; that is, the last employee released within a classification as a result of reduction in force shall be the first rehired when the Employer needs additional employees. The Employer shall notify such employees to return to work and furnish the Union a copy of such notification, and if the employee fails to notify the Employer within ten (10) calendar days of his/her intention to return to work, such employees shall be considered as having forfeited his/her right to reemployment. Employees shall be eligible for recall for up to one year from the date of layoff.\par

\pard\keepn\widctlpar\s4\sb240\sa60\ul\b MPEA\par

\pard\widctlpar\ulnone\par
Notice: \b0  The employer shall give at least thirty (30) calendar days\rquote  notice to employees who are to be laid off. Layoffs within the selected job title and budgeted department shall be in reverse order of seniority.                  \par
\b\f7\par
MOU -- REDUCTION IN FORCE\par
\b0\f0 (Expires June 30, 2015)\par
In addition to provisions of the current collective bargaining agreement, the following terms and conditions are in place through June 30, 2015:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\widctlpar\fi-360\li720 If a layoff is necessary within a budgeted department, management will communicate the necessity of the layoff, and any employee of the budgeted department in the same job title as the position scheduled for elimination may volunteer to take the layoff. Management will consider the volunteer request before deciding whether to grant the request or administer the layoff under the terms of the CBA. In the event the request for voluntary layoff is accepted by management, the layoff will be treated as a non-voluntary layoff for purposes of all applicable benefits and CBA provisions.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Management will provide greater than 30 days\rquote  notice of any layoff whenever reasonably possible, however, in all cases shall provide at least a minimum of 30 days\rquote  notice.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Employees who have received notice of layoff may request paid release from work duties (not charged to annual vacation leave or accrued compensatory time) to conduct a reasonable amount of job search tasks (e.g., an appointment at a job service office, a scheduled job interview, limited amount of work on job applications, etc.) Management will grant the request with consideration of how much release time to grant based on department needs, employee needs, job type, workload, budget, etc.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Fixed term and temporary staff employees within the budgeted department experiencing the need for staff layoff(s) shall be eliminated prior to a layoff of a bargaining unit member. Exceptions to this provision will be permissible if a fixed term and/or temporary staff employee possesses unique knowledge and/or skills required to complete a specific project, duty, or responsibility.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Any bargaining unit member who has been notified of layoff and such layoff is intended to take effect while the employee is utilizing the MUS staff tuition waiver or dependent partial tuition waiver shall continue their eligibility the remainder of the semester\par

\pard\widctlpar\b\par
Recall:\b0   Employees shall be recalled to vacant positions within their former job titles and department in order of seniority. Employees will be eligible for such recall for one (1) year from the date of layoff. Employees who have extended their eligibility for participation in the layoff pool for one (1) additional year in accordance with Section 8 of the MPEA CBA shall be eligible for recall for one (1) additional year. The laid off employee shall be notified by certified mail of any recall of employment. If the employee fails to communicate receipt of a recall to employment or an offer of reemployment within ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of the notice or offer, the employee shall be considered as having forfeited recall rights.\par
\par
\b Layoff Pool Information:  \b0 Permanent employees who have been notified of a layoff may submit an application to HRS, which will be placed in the layoff pool for recall purposes.  Eligible employees must apply to the layoff pool within 30 days from the date of written notification of layoff or their rights to the layoff pool shall be waived.  Applications for the layoff pool will be active for one year and may be extended for one additional year by the employee renewing their application.  Employees in the layoff pool may apply for any \ul bargaining unit \ulnone position for which they qualify.  Hiring authorities must first consider employees in the layoff pool for open positions in the bargaining unit and shall hire from the layoff pool if the employee meets minimum qualifications.  If an employee who is placed in the layoff pool does not satisfactorily complete a 30 working day trial period, the employer may return the employee to the layoff pool. \b\par

\pard\keepn\widctlpar\s3\sb240\sa60\ul\par
TEAMSTERS Local #2\par

\pard\widctlpar\par
\ulnone Notice:\b0   Whenever possible, the employer shall give affected employees and the bargaining agent at least thirty (30) calendar days\rquote  notice of anticipated layoffs.  Seniority shall be the controlling factor in selection of employees for layoff within each classification.\par
\par
\b Recall:\b0   Employees will be eligible for recall for one (1) year from the date of any layoff. Recall from layoffs shall be in reverse order of layoff. The employee shall be notified by certified mail of any recall to employment. If the employee fails to communicate acceptance of the offer of recall within ten (10) working days from the date of the mailing of the written notice, the employee shall be considered as having forfeited any right to recall. Recall from layoff shall constitute reinstatement under the terms of this agreement.\par
\par
\ul\b OPERATING ENGINEERS Local 400 - 4 year campuses:\par
\ulnone\b0\par

\pard\hyphpar0\widctlpar\b Notice:\b0  The Employer shall give at least 30 calendar days notice to employees who are to be laid off and to the Bargaining Agent. The notice shall specify whether the layoff is temporary or permanent.  Both layoffs and recalls to employment shall be in order of seniority within a classification and within a budgeted department. The employee last hired will be the first released and the last employee released will be the first rehired. The employee with the least cumulative seniority in that classification and department shall be identified and given notice of layoff unless that employee is eligible to bump into a lower graded position. When calculating cumulative seniority for layoff purposes, an employee\rquote s cumulative seniority shall include seniority earned in any higher or lower paid classification in the bargaining unit on the employing campus. To bump an employee in a lower-graded position an employee must have worked on campus in the lower-graded position on a permanent, full-time basis and must have greater seniority than the least senior employee in the lower-graded position. Seniority may not be used to bump employees in higher grades.\par
\par
\b Recall:\b0   Employees who have been laid off shall be entitled to be recalled to their former classification if a position becomes available at the employing campus within one year from the date of layoff. Both the employee and the Bargaining Agent shall be notified by certified mail of any recall to employment. If the employee fails to communicate acceptance of a recall to employment or an offer of re-employment within ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of the written notice, the employee shall be considered as having forfeited any right to recall. In no case shall the total time for the employee to communicate acceptance exceed 20 working days from the date of mailing of the written notice. It is the responsibility of employees to inform the Employer of their current address.\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\ul\b Missoula College OPERATING ENGINEERS:\par
\ulnone\b0\par
\b Notice:\b0   Employees shall be given a minimum of ten (10) working days notice prior to an unscheduled layoff.  Layoffs shall be in order of seniority within a classification by campus within the bargaining unit.\par
\par
\par
\b Recall:\b0   Employees shall be recalled to their former position in reverse order of layoff. Employees will be eligible for recall for one year from the date of layoff. The laid off employee shall be notified at their last known address by certified mail of any recall to employment. If the employee fails to communicate acceptance of a recall to employment within 14 calendar days from the date of the mailing of the notice of recall to the employee\rquote s last known address, the employee shall be considered as having forfeited any right to reemployment.\par
\par

\pard\keepn\widctlpar\s3\sb240\sa60\ul\b PAINTERS\par

\pard\widctlpar\ulnone\b0\par
\b Notice:\b0   The employer shall give affected employees and the bargaining agent at least ten (10) calendar days' notice of anticipated layoff.  Seniority shall be the controlling factor in selection of employees for an involuntary layoff within each classification and within a budgeted department.\par
\par
\b Recall:  \b0 Employees shall be eligible for recall for one (1) year from the date of a layoff. Recall from layoffs shall be in reverse order of layoff. The employee shall be noticed by certified mail of any recall to employment. If the employee fails to communicate acceptance of the offer of recall within ten (10) working days from the date of mailing of the written notice, the employee shall be considered as having forfeited any right to recall.\par
\b\par

\pard\keepn\widctlpar\s3\sb240\sa60\ul PLUMBERS\par

\pard\widctlpar\ulnone\b0\par
\b Notice: \b0  At least fifteen (15) working days notice shall be given before any layoff.  Both layoffs and recalls to employment shall be in order of seniority within a classification as long as employees are qualified to do the job.\par
\par
\b Recall:\b0   Employees will be eligible for recall for up to one (1) year from the date of layoff. Both the employee on layoff and the bargaining agent shall be notified by certified mail of any recall to employment. If the employee fails to communicate acceptance of a recall to employment within ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of the notice or offer, the employee shall be considered as having forfeited any recall right or right to reemployment.\par
\par
\par
\cf1\ul\b GRAPHIC COMMUNICATION INTERNATIONAL UNION LOCAL 242-C\par
\cf0\ulnone\b0\par
\b Notice:\b0  The Bargaining Agent shall be given a least ten working days\rquote  notice of any anticipated layoff other than a scheduled layoff to any employee in the bargaining unit.  Both layoffs and recalls to employment shall be in order of seniority within a job title and within a budgeted department. The employee last hired will be the first released and the last employee released will be the first rehired.\par
\par
\b Recall:\b0\f8  \f0 Layoffs and recalls to employment shall be in the order of seniority and any employee laid off shall be automatically notified of and considered for any subsequent job openings for which the employee may be qualified for up to two years after the date of the layoff. Both the employee and the Bargaining Agent shall be notified by certified mail of any recall to employment and if the employee fails to communicate acceptance of the offer of reemployment within ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of the offer, the employee shall be considered as having forfeited the right to reemployment.\par

\pard\keepn\widctlpar\s3\sb240\sa60\ul\b NON-UNION\b0  Personnel Policy Layoff:  Non-Union Staff Employees\par

\pard\hyphpar0\widctlpar\ulnone\par
\b Notice: \b0  Employees will receive a minimum of 30-calendar days notice prior to layoff.  The notice will specify whether the layoff is permanent, temporary or scheduled.  Because the layoff is not a discharge for cause, the University will provide letters of recommendation and HRS may assist the employee in seeking other employment upon request.\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\li6480\fs16      Updated: February 27, 2014\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f9\fs22\lang9\par
}
 